EZP-30882 As a developer I want to use custom Field Type as Content thumbnail (#960)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/guide/extending/extending_thumbnails.md

# Extending thumbnails

> Thumbnails allow you to easily choose an image for a specific Content Type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thumbnails enable you to easily choose an image for a specific Content Type.
```
Add a sentence on where the thumbnail is used (content browse? sub-items?), and what thumbnails are used when you don't customize anything

## Thumbnail mechanism 

> Thumbnail mechanism has two layers, and each layer can have many implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The thumbnail mechanism has two layers, and each layer can have many implementations.
```

> The mechanism checks if any of the implementations contains an image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mechanism checks if any of the implementations returns an image.
```

> If found, the image is returned as a Content Type thumbnail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If found, the image is used as a Content Type thumbnail.
```

First layer of the mechanism contains strategy pattern that focuses on finding a thumbnail.

> The thumbnail can be found inside or outside the Content Type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The thumbnail can be found inside or outside the Content Type.
```

> e.g. for users thumbnails can be downloaded from avatar generating service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example for users thumbnails can be downloaded from an avatar-generating service.
```

For this layer there are two default implementations.

> First looks for images in Field Types, and after that the second one will look for them in Content Type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first looks for images in Fields, and after that the second one will look for them in the Content Type.
```

> If there are no Field Types with a thumbnail image, the `ContentType` icon will be used as a thumbnail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are no Fields with a thumbnail image, the Content Type icon will be used as a thumbnail.
```

This mechanism can be modified to fit your site needs, so you can decide from where and how the thumbnails will be downloaded.

> Second layer of Thumbnail mechanism enables selection of thumbnail from a Field Type. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second layer of thumbnail mechanism enables selection of thumbnail from a Field. 
```
Also, does this mean the second layer is used only when the first one doesn't work? Does it mean that the checkbox can be overridden by the first layer?

> It searches all the Field Types for images with function "Can be a thumbnail" turned on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It searches all the Fields for images with function "Can be a thumbnail" turned on.
```

![Can be a thumbnail setting](img/extending_thumbnail_can_be.png)

> This layer will return the fist nonempty Filed Type that can be a thumbnail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This layer will return the first nonempty Field that can be a thumbnail.
```

> If there are no Field Types with a thumbnail option turned on, the `ContentType` icon will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are no Fields with a thumbnail option turned on, the `ContentType` icon will be used.
```

### Add a thumbnail mechanism 

> First, create `StaticStrategy.php` in `src/Strategy`. It is a base strategy for returning static thumbnails.

Reviewer: Maybe add an explanation what is a "static" thumbnail?

```php
<?php
​
declare(strict_types=1);
​
namespace App\Strategy;
​
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\Content\Thumbnail;
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\ContentType\ContentType;
use eZ\Publish\SPI\Repository\Strategy\ContentThumbnail\ThumbnailStrategy;
​
final class StaticStrategy implements ThumbnailStrategy
{
    /** @var string */
    private $staticThumbnail;
​
    public function __construct(string $staticThumbnail)
    {
        $this->staticThumbnail = $staticThumbnail;
    }
​
    public function getThumbnail(ContentType $contentType, array $fields): Thumbnail
    {
        return new Thumbnail([
            'resource' => $this->staticThumbnail,
        ]);
    }
}
```

> Next, add the `ezplatform.spi.content.thumbnail_strategy` tag with `priority: 100` to `config/services.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add the strategy with the `ezplatform.spi.content.thumbnail_strategy` tag and `priority: 100` to `config/services.yaml`:
```

 
```yaml
services:
    App\Strategy\StaticStrategy:
        arguments:
            $staticThumbnail: http://example.com/some_image.jpg
        tags:
            - { name: ezplatform.spi.content.thumbnail_strategy, priority: 100 }
```

> Priority `100` will allow this strategy to be evoked as first on clean installation or before any other strategy with lower priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Priority `100` will allow this strategy to be used first on a clean installation or before any other strategy with lower priority.
```

At this point you can go to the Back Office and check the results.

> ## Other fields as thumbnails

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Other Fields as thumbnails
```

> Any Field Type can generate a thumbnail e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any Field Type can generate a thumbnail, e.g.:
```

- `DateAndTime` - you can add a mini calendar thumbnail for Appointment Content Type and on the day of the appointment a clock thumbnail with a specific time when it takes place

> - `eztext` -  you can add a first letter of the text block that is inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DateAndTime (`ezdatetime`) - you can add a mini calendar thumbnail for Appointment Content Type and on the day of the appointment a clock thumbnail with a specific time when it takes place
- TextBlock (`eztext`) -  you can add a first letter of the text block that is inside
```

> ### Add eztext field as thumbnail

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add eztext Field as thumbnail
```

> First, create a strategy that will add support for `extext` as the thumbnail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create a strategy that will add support for `eztext` as the thumbnail.
```

> It will allow you to add a thumbnail URL in the text field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will enable you to add a thumbnail URL in the text field.
```

Add `ImageUrlThumbnailStrategy.php` in `src/FieldType/ImageUrl`.

```php
<?php
​
declare(strict_types=1);
​
namespace App\FieldType\ImageUrl;
​
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\Content\Field;
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\Content\Thumbnail;
use eZ\Publish\SPI\Repository\Strategy\ContentThumbnail\Field\ThumbnailStrategy;
​
class ImageUrlThumbnailStrategy implements ThumbnailStrategy
{
	public function getFieldTypeIdentifier(): string
	{
		return 'eztext';
	}
	
    public function getThumbnail(Field $field): ?Thumbnail
    {
        return new Thumbnail([
            'resource' => $field->value,
        ]);
    }
}
```

> Next, add the `ezplatform.spi.field.thumbnail_strategy` tag to `config/services.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, add the strategy with the `ezplatform.spi.field.thumbnail_strategy` tag to `config/services.yaml`:
```

# Extending thumbnails

> Thumbnails enable you to easily choose an image for a specific Content Type.

Reviewer 2: This introduction sentence could be improved, I think.
- I'd use the terms "the thumbnails API", as it is what we provide.
- The process is not "content type" specific. The description below does say that it iterates through fields definitions (independently of content type), and then falls back to the content type's icon.

If you do not want to use custom thumbnails [`ContentType` icons](../../resources/icons.md#content-types) will be used instead.

## Thumbnail mechanism 

> The thumbnail mechanism has two layers, and each layer can have many implementations.

Reviewer 2: I would start by describing the default process, the one that uses the "Use as thumbnail" checkbox in fields definitions, as it is what most users will face on a daily basis. Then I would go into details.

The mechanism checks if any of the implementations returns an image that can be a thumbnail.
If found, the image is used as a Content Type thumbnail.

First layer of the mechanism contains strategy pattern that focuses on finding a thumbnail.
The thumbnail can be found inside or outside the Content Type.
For example for users thumbnails can be downloaded from an avatar-generating service.

For this layer there are two default implementations.
The first looks for images in Fields, and after that the second one will look for them in the Content Type.
If there are no Fields that contain an image that can be a thumbnail, the Content Type icon will be used as a thumbnail.
This mechanism can be modified to fit your site needs, so you can decide from where and how the thumbnails will be downloaded.

> Second layer of thumbnail mechanism enables selection of thumbnail from a Field that first layer has found. 

Reviewer 2: Is it really a second layer ? Won't the first layer be restricted to fields that have the "Can be a thumbnail" option enabled ? This description feels complex to me. Maybe a schema would help.

It searches the Field for images with function "Can be a thumbnail" turned on.

![Can be a thumbnail setting](img/extending_thumbnail_can_be.png)

> If there is more than one image in the Field, this layer will return the first nonempty image that can be a thumbnail.

Reviewer 2: How can there be more than one image in _one field_ ? Did you mean content item, not field ?

### Add a thumbnail mechanism 

> First, create `StaticStrategy.php` in `src/Strategy`.

Reviewer 2: I'd explain what the example below will do before going into the code.

            'resource' => $this->staticThumbnail,
        ]);
    }
}
```

Next, add the strategy with the `ezplatform.spi.content.thumbnail_strategy` tag and `priority: 100` to `config/services.yaml`:
 
```yaml
services:
    App\Strategy\StaticStrategy:
        arguments:
            $staticThumbnail: http://example.com/some_image.jpg
        tags:
            - { name: ezplatform.spi.content.thumbnail_strategy, priority: 100 }
```

Priority `100` will allow this strategy to be used first on a clean installation or before any other strategy with lower priority.

At this point you can go to the Back Office and check the results.

## Other Fields as thumbnails

Any Field Type can generate a thumbnail, e.g.:

- DateAndTime (`ezdatetime`) - you can add a mini calendar thumbnail for Appointment Content Type and on the day of the appointment a clock thumbnail with a specific time when it takes place
- TextBlock (`eztext`) -  you can add a first letter of the text block that is inside

### Add eztext Field as thumbnail

First, create a strategy that will add support for `eztext` as the thumbnail.
It will enable you to add a thumbnail URL in the text field.

> Add `ImageUrlThumbnailStrategy.php` in `src/FieldType/ImageUrl`.

Reviewer 2: It is a detail, but as an integrator, I'd structure that differently. Maybe `eZ/Thumbnails/FieldValueUrl.php`.

```php
<?php
​
declare(strict_types=1);
​
namespace App\FieldType\ImageUrl;
​
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\Content\Field;
use eZ\Publish\API\Repository\Values\Content\Thumbnail;
use eZ\Publish\SPI\Repository\Strategy\ContentThumbnail\Field\ThumbnailStrategy;
​
class ImageUrlThumbnailStrategy implements ThumbnailStrategy
{
	public function getFieldTypeIdentifier(): string
	{
		return 'eztext';
	}
	
    public function getThumbnail(Field $field): ?Thumbnail
    {
        return new Thumbnail([
            'resource' => $field->value,
        ]);
    }
}
```

Next, add the strategy with the `ezplatform.spi.field.thumbnail_strategy` tag to `config/services.yaml`:

 ```yaml
 services:

>      App\FieldType\ImageUrl\ImageUrlThumbnailStrategy:

Reviewer 2: For the dev team: no auto-tagging of `ThumbnailStrategy` instances as `ezplatform.spi.field.thumbnail_strategy` ?

Reviewer 3: We can make improvement here :)

The mechanism checks if any of the implementations returns an image that can be a thumbnail.
If found, the image is used as a Content Type thumbnail.

### First layer

First layer of the mechanism contains strategy pattern that focuses on finding a thumbnail source.
The thumbnail can be found inside or outside the Content Type.
For example for users thumbnails can be downloaded from an avatar-generating service.

For this layer there are following default implementations:

> - Mechanism looks for Fields that can be thumbnail, if found, mechanism moves to the second layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The mechanism looks for Fields that can be thumbnail, if found, the mechanism moves to the second layer.
```
